Parkinson, Joseph Keller, New York.
Let's see if any other interview would start like this.
The interview you did with George Clinton in the Paris Review by 20 years ago.
I'm quoting you.
You said, my novels begin in a strange way.
I don't begin with a theme or even a character.
I begin with a first sentence that is independent of any conscious preparation.
I'm just wondering if
this new novel started in a similar fashion?
I would say probably yes and probably no.
I had, in my mind, the thought had been raised, and I considered doing a sequel to Catchaway 2, but that had been four or five years before this.
I'd finished another novel, and I got a sentence.
And the fact that that sentence did come to me out of wherever my ideas come,
In the case, I must have been thinking about doing it, perhaps unconsciously.
I woke up with this thought.
Now, this has happened before.
I will wake up and things are going well.
I begin writing in my mind before I'm getting out of bed.
And the sentence was this.
In the middle of the second week in the hospital, Josiah began dreaming of his mother.
And he knew again that he was going to die.
Now, I jotted that down on a note.
And then time passed.
And then I had that note, and I finished Picture This.
It was published.
And then I began thinking about the book, about doing a book about Yossarian.
And the second thought that came to me was Yossarian was not going to be 26 or 28 years old.
It was going to be my age.
And the third thought that came to me was the book was going to be as much or more about me than it would be about Yossarian or any of the characters in Catch-22.
And that necessitated my creating other characters who would have parts of my own autobiography as aspects of their own.
And that's the way Closing Time eventually develops.
You mentioned in the Barbara Gell interview on The Times a couple weeks ago, you stressed that this is not an autobiographical novel.
It is not autobiography.
It draws more than any of my works on my own experience, experience as a child in a Jewish family, in a Jewish neighborhood in Tony Island, as a child who went north to the Army quite happily, who had, for the most part, a rather good and beneficial time in the Army, who then went to college under the G.R.
Bill of Rights, and then formulated the ambition to be a writer.
All of that is in closing time, and most of it is in his character, Sam Singer.
Some of the aspects are given to other characters there.
And among my close friends from childhood on was a man named Lou Beckman, who did die of Hodgkin's disease, and I consulted his widow, who's still a good friend, and she gave me input to tales of their courtship and married life.
And another good friend is Marvin Winkler, and I use him by name in the novel.
And he is there more, he's less developed than Lewis or did Sam Singler's.
And I even throw in, sort of, for good measure, a reference to a kid named Joey Heller.
And that is there.
Well, that's there to inform the reader that much of this does come out of actual food.
Is this Joey Heller, the real Joey Heller?
The Joey Heller that's referred to in the book, and he's referred to very scantily,
Again, it was my own past, my own experience.
The Jell-Hell in the book's father died.
His mother was a seamstress and did work for Warby Turning Colors.
That was true of my family, not Sam Singer's family.
He went to work delivering telegrams.
That was true of me also, and he wanted to be a writer, and that was true.
And then the second reference to him, which comes much later from a different category, who says,
Lou is running for people.
He knows all his life, some of them died, some of them were sick, and realized that he's lived much longer than he should have, because Hodgkin's disease.
And among the people, he mentions Joey Howard and the Ambrose Syndrome.
That's me, too.
That's about the extent of me.
On to Sam Singer and on to Osarian, I give very much other elements of my own personal experience.
The decision to not make this area the main event here, tell me a little bit about that.
Well, I don't think we live in an age in which heroes are heroic anymore, and romantic figures are romantic, in which there are causes, rebellious causes, in which there are institutions against, or policies against which people rebel successfully.
We also live in a time when there is no direct threat to us as there is in war.
And to create a figure who would be romantic, who always be quixotic at this time seems to me, would have been out of place or out of place for me.
The mood has changed.
I think the awareness of who we are and where we live and who we live with and what we live with is much different now than it was in the time when Catch-22 was born.
There is great optimism.
There were many conflicts going on in the threat of war continually.
We don't have the threat of war anymore.
We have the possibilities of war, but usually now they're of our own making.
But relate this to the decision... Oh, well, yeah, well, I could not...
Then you go sadly, as a figure he was, because I have to account for what's happened in the past 30 or 40 years.
And what he's done is he's bowed to reality.
I don't go into that to a great extent.
And what the reality of the American experience has been is for people who are educated and married and want family, the reality is we must accept
the conditions in which we live, the social conditions, the economic conditions, and the business conditions.
And I've done it, and Yosari has done it, and in my now, Sam Singer has done it.
And writing the books on Because Yosari and the Time for Ideals is over.
Don't forget your ideals.
We don't have them anymore.
It's also verified by what I take to be the mood and the confusion and indecision of young people coming out of college, and this has been true for 10 or 15 years.
They don't rush out of college with an appetite to get going on work they want to do.
So Sinner was perfect for you.
You had him unnamed in Catch-22, I guess.
No, he's not named in Catch-22.
He's unnamed, I said.
You have him unnamed.
Yeah.
Oh, see, that is part of the technique of constructing a novel.
To tell this novel from different points of view and yet bring it together at some point so they are dealing with common experiences and eventually they'll meet.
And the technique I used was to
Make Sam Singer the tail gunner in that plane on the Mission Pavilion.
That's in Catch-22.
Did you have to go back and reconstruct him in your mind, or do you think he came fully formed?
He's not described at all in Catch-22.
I understand that, but you certainly knew he was there.
You knew you had a tail gunner that you could draw on.
Well, once I decided to use a tail gunner, and I decided to make him represent me or my attitudes and my past,
It was kind of easy.
He's short.
I'm not.
That's irrelevant, really.
Yeah.
No, I had a TA as a tail gunner, and then I'd give him a military pass, which brings him into contact with your servant.
That was not a hard part.
I know you've discussed a bit of this in the Gelties, but that's fine.
It looks perceived like that doesn't exist.
I would certainly, my first question would have been, had she not already asked it, the risk that you faced in writing a sequel to one of the signature novels of the last 65 years.
It was in my mind, and that also, I minimized that risk by creating a different novel, an independent novel, in all respects and style as well, and in content.
And I think I minimized the risk by doing that.
I think the risk would have been grave, and I possibly would have been ashamed of myself, and I would not have done it, would be to just duplicate catchphrase, or emulate, or try to write that same novel about the same people today.
Either they're 45 or 50 years older, or by some scheme, they're not.
And that became impossible, even conceived of doing.
Whereas the idea of writing a novel, drawing on my background, drawing on the background of what we call the American experience for the middle class since World War II, became very stimulating and provoking.
And in that background was the existence of CAT-22.
In the background for me and for much of the reading public, CAT-22 does exist.
I followed that pattern, this pattern in particular, of using other literary characters along with real people.
So, Josarian is a literary character from Catch-22, and we know it.
And then there was a good soldier, Strike, from that book, and Joseph K. from Kafka, and Kat Vonig is in the book, and Truman Capote for Grimms, and then there's Hemingway.
Where does this stuff come from?
I don't know where it comes from.
That's what baffles me and confuses me.
I felt this while doing Catch-22, that ideas would come to me.
I don't know where they came from.
I knew they were good.
I knew they were precious.
And funny.
And yet I knew that they came out of a part of my mind that involves the imagination and a part of my mind they can't control.
We're sitting here on a Sunday afternoon in New York, just for the sake of my tape.
Of course, you must have gotten the TBR earlier in the week, but what a wonderful review that was.
It's a review that makes my week.
It puts me in the most exhilarating frame.
I rushed out this morning.
I said, I'm just guessing that they're going to leave.
I'm just a guess.
I was going to get my times when I came to New York.
I said, no, I bet you'll leave with the review and their advice.
And I said, .
Well, I do, too.
I said, a review to, I mean, I know novelists, writers, they say they don't even read them.
No, you read Baloney, isn't it?
No, I read reviews.
I try to avoid seeing bad reviews, but there's always some good.
You're going to get them, I mean.
No, there's always some good friend who brings my attention, you know.
That's right.
Yeah, but this review is, uh,
It pretty much nullifies the effect, the emotional effects of anything that follows.
A page one review.
And the man clearly read it.
And he said he wasn't disposed much to catch 22.
And he said, this is great.
I like this.
It puts me in terrific frame on tomorrow there's a publishing party.
And that's been scheduled a month or so ago, or two months ago.
And I could not help thinking what kind of party it would be if the Review and the Times had been a negative entree of one.
So I feel I've been blessed.
Well, and the author's
introduction to the new edition of Catch-22.
You talk again about reviews and how they even get into the life of the book, and perhaps even, you know, the fortunes of the book.
Well, they do.
Getting back to the element of risk, it was almost certainty that my doing a book that would be called or could be called a sequel to Catch-Rack 2 would command a lot of attention, a lot of publicity, and that there would be a
a decent sale for the book, regardless of you.
So the risk of, it wasn't always in my mind, the risk of being cute, used to being cheap, was kind of compensated by it.
Used to being cheap.
In what respect?
Well, if I... Yeah, yeah.
Catching in on Catcher 2 and adding nothing to it.
Catcher 2 is yours, though, I mean.
Yeah, but, you know, I consider that woman writing a sequel from here to... Yeah, but I'm not that woman.
I think I'm saying that's him.
I'm a novelist, and I take my work very seriously.
I haven't done a book that took less than four years of my time.
It's very hard work for me.
And if I suddenly did a book that was not hard work and that showed it, then I would feel I was not acting in good faith and not in a way consistent with my own ethical views and my own regard to fiction.
Has there ever been a poem?
Do you have unfinished novels in the drawer?
No.
I mean, so there's no point of no return for you.
You don't say this, you've never, I never would have heard you that this isn't working.
No, I don't, I don't really start a book or go very fondly without knowing where it's going.
With this book and with all my other books, I had the ending in mind when it began, but also I would do conscientiously, when I talk about a first draft, there's no such thing, everything is rewritten.
I would do 150, 200 pages before I would begin to understand what the book is really about, envision its size, envision the relative importance of the characters and the different themes in it.
And with this book, I think I did that two or three times, just even getting the arrangements of the chapters, you know, what chapter was to follow which.
At the beginning, there was a chapter...
The first chapter, Introducing Your Sound, was about 60 or 70 pages.
I knew it was too long, so then I had to find some way of providing it and find something to put in between it.
And it took time, and then I redid it.
And it's advantageous, and there was an advantage to it also, because one of the things it told me was how to indicate a passage of time.
None of my books do I keep a calendar sequence.
I don't even know what seasons it is.
And then I realized by taking a chapter of your Saturday and then putting a chapter about Samuel or the post-total, that in itself indicates the passage of time.
So when I got back to your Saturday, I could change the season.
And without even specifying how many weeks have elapsed since the first chapter, the time was passing.
It was important for you to age Yossarian in real time.
In the book or before?
In the book.
Well, it was important for you to have a year or two pass because the events required.
Well, I mean from the events of Catch-22 and bringing him forward in real time.
Oh, yes, of course.
I mean, there are...
fictional characters of age at all, as we all know.
No, it was very important for me to deal with him and myself.
In all my books, even God knows, I'm dealing with the present.
I'm dealing with not my own personal experience, but the experience I have as one of the general population and a generation.
How has the world affected me?
How does it look to the rest of us?
That's true in all my novels.
Experience.
The common experience is very much the substance of all my novels.
Once again, the common experience?
Yeah, the common experience we share is very much the substance of all my novels.
You know, in that same 1974 interview I began this interview with, you said then that you weren't much
You didn't consider yourself a very good descriptive writer.
And I think that you've overcome that.
I've overcome it.
Well, the funny part is... Description to the bus terminal is... Oh, yes.
But description is... By description, I mean description.
I mean knowing what color this couch is, and knowing whether that wood is walnut or oak, and how you describe the metal under this table.
I'm lost when it comes to things like that.
I'm in awe of people like John Updike, with their command of these phrases and their knowledge of material things.
That's what I meant by that.
But when I re-read Catch-22 in preparation for Closing Time, I was bedazzled by my vocabulary, my descriptive vocabulary in Catch-22.
And when it came to things like describing trees or leaves or the sky or wind, I thought I had not written on it.
I thought I was reading a book by a much better writer than I am.
Come on.
No, seriously.
How long has it been since you read it?
Oh, a long time.
Very long.
Yeah, maybe 2020.
No kidding.
Yeah.
And I was so surprised to find words and phrases.
Hey, this guy's pretty good.
Yeah.
It's like reading Evelyn Waller, reading a description by Charles Dickinson.
They were not my vocabulary, my literary vocabulary.
I must have spent so much time with O.J.
to service.
Maybe that, but you said you're a tireless rewriter.
Yeah, yeah.
Now, do you use a computer, or is it still...?
Well, it's still longhand, but from longhand I go to a computer, whereas in the past, from longhand I go to a typewriter.
Rewriting is my book for longhand on the typewriter.
Now I rewrite on the computer.
I like that part very much.
The rewriting is very good.
It's very much easier typing.
You still write ideas down in 3x5 cards?
Yeah.
Oh, sure.
That's where I found that Yosarian sentence.
And that must have been put down before I had finished the picture of this, because I found it in the cabinet of cards with the picture of this.
At one point, I might have
I can't see I would have thought of using it and picture this, but I had no other place to put it, so I put it in that small cabinet.
Was writing a sequel to Catch-22 something that generated entirely within yourself?
I'm sure people have constantly asked you, what happened to these people?
It was my own decision to go ahead and it's the same.
The factors are the same as the Catch-22.
I was looking for an idea for a novel, a subject for a new novel, and the best subject that came to me was this book Closing Time.
The fact that it was a sequel is prolific in the intention.
What happened is I saw it as a chance to do a very, very good book, a meaningful book.
Uh-oh.
about things I feel and about things we experience about our world today and the individual world.
The fact that the people who were in World War II, people are nearing the end of their lives.
How did you feel when you were watching this D-Day stuff?
I felt it, but I thought I was reading my book.
Here's the book.
I mean, I've just written this, and I'm looking at it now.
And these are the survivors.
These are the ones that don't look like soldiers.
No.
Well, I have that the very first pages of closing time.
That's how the book starts.
What?
Yeah, but people my age talked about wars, not Vietnam.
One of the wars started almost half a century ago.
How's that your experience in that war?
I mean, I'm a Vietnam War guy myself.
My war, the event of my generation was that war.
And it happens that I've interviewed a couple of people recently, like Tobias Wolff, I did for Publishers Weekly.
They've interviewed for Publishers Weekly now, too.
And Tim O'Brien, who's life.
Yeah.
World War II has, I guess, affected your life in ways that... Well, it's in closing time.
Sam Singer says it more than once, and Josiah says it, that World War II was a blessing for them.
It could have changed their lives.
It enriched them.
As Sam Singer says, the day he went to the army, he was earning more money than anything as a power quake.
It was a very good experience for those of us who were not wounded and not killed and didn't go crazy.
And I think even Vonnegut might say the same way.
I mean, he was more in combat than he was taken prisoner.
You have him in the book, too.
But yeah, and the reason is, again, to let people out in the fictional work.
The fictional work is rooted in reality.
See, he gave me information about being a POW, taking prison in the bulge, and how he got to prison camp, and how he got to prison camp to Dresden.
And I felt, well, since I wanted to use it, if I use it without attributing it to him, people who know Slaughterhouse-Five and know his essays will know that I've been talking about it.
So I might as well put him right back in the POW camp, and put him in Dresden.
with this other category, Lewa Minowich.
I was astonished to read, and I can only compare it to one other example, but you haven't been into the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
This is entirely second-hand, basically second-hand information.
It is second-hand information.
It came from news report reports, and Newsweek did a piece of the report.
A New Jersey newspaper did a piece on the bus tunnel, and I began clipping these stories from them.
Then I did find this wonderful researcher whom I'd never met, but he was in New Jersey and coming here.
About two or three people have interviewed him, by the way.
They all commute to New Jersey.
I got through a bus tunnel.
And I told him one day to spend about two or three hours and just walk around telling me what you see.
So I put together his observations with reports and papers.
For me, I'd probably want to go and see it myself.
Why would you personally not want to go?
If I were here in New York City, I would do it, but it's a three-hour trip for me to get here.
And if I felt I needed more, I would have done it.
When I interviewed Tom Wolfe the first time in his book The White Stuff, I spent three years on an aircraft carrier.
And he had that aircraft carrier down.
He says, I've never even seen one.
I mean, he called people and they told him.
I said, well, could we do it?
I think that's part of the talent of a writer, fiction or non-fiction.
No writer describes every detail of everything physical.
They never describe every detail of a face or something.
or even a pair of shoes, let's say, or, let's say, red shoes, or that woman's wearing red shoes.
I think the path of the writer, I don't know how he gets it, but just develops instinctively, is to give a few of those details which enable the reader to see the whole thing, and I believe Tom Wolf certainly has it, and I think I have it with the best terminal.
It's wonderful.
I take all these notes of the books here,
find out, you know, when you get to do the interview, you look it up, look it up.
I enjoyed it so much.
I have to tell you when I interviewed John Irving last month, and this is a question for you at some point, but he is so identified with the world according to Garb that people tend to measure everything that he does against that novel.
And of course, your name, in fact, that was the day I was there, was the day that the Galpies came out.
And he said, you know, well, look at Joe Heller.
He said, I personally, he said, something happened to me.
He enjoyed it so much more than Catch-22, not to take anything away from it.
Yeah, very many people tell me that now.
And John Irving said that.
And he said, use that in your piece, because I just feel that way.
And he said, but these critics, these reviewers keep insisting on saying, well,
It's back since Catch-22.
I mean, it's hard, especially in your case.
That was his fifth book.
Catch-22 was your first.
But I'm sorry, you're about to say something.
Yeah, I was going to say it does not bother me, being identified.
No, it's good to know that there is that book back there, that almost everybody holds an highest name, even the Review and the States Times.
He doesn't despise the book.
just that he's a person who does not think as much of it as other people do.
He doesn't denigrate it.
And I think his descriptions of Catch-22 are fairly accurate.
And I think Closing Time is a much broader book and deals with many more ideas than Catch-22 in a different way.
I'm not offended if he says he thinks it's a better book than Catch-22.
It's a more mature book, and it was more difficult to write.
The interesting thing for me is each year, or each two years, when people talk to me, in the course of interviews, more and more will tell me how much they've been impressed by something happened, how deeply affected they are by it.
And it was a much more difficult book to do successfully, you know, than catchphrase.
Well, you know that.
There's no fit.
There's very little fiscal action in it, and very little comedy.
It is interesting that Irving jumped right out of that.
When it was something happened, he said that book.
In my view, he said that book's his masterpiece.
Well, that's quite a good point.
If you try to complement, but knowing John's work so well, I can understand why.
He has such a strong attachment for children.
There's a man who has such strong attachments, and so strong attachments to all his children, they become ambivalent and contentious, and he can't figure them out.
I can understand Jones.
I remember when I was at Bill Kennedy's house outside of Albany,
And that day, the proof came in for good as gold.
And he said, oh, I can't wait there.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
He knew about it.
Yeah, well, I guess that they were, what, setting it?
Yeah.
Well, he reviewed something happening in the public.
That's right.
Yeah.
And David was an extraordinary guy.
He's one of them.
I think he's a wonderful writer.
He's a wonderful writer, one of the most generous people.
Very nice.
Very nice guy.
Ah, okay, let me look at my notes here.
He and Irwin Shaw, among novels, impressed me of having the most generous words imaginable.
To another writer.
He and who else?
I loved his stuff.
Well, Irwin Shaw found me before I was published, and so on.
With Mark Buckworth, sent a telegraph.
Oh, really?
I don't know.
Oh, there was a well-known telegraph.
A telegram that came.
It was in the first dance of Catch-the-Roy-Toon.
It's since we've been created.
And it's from Mark Buckworth, who's got the company at Galleys.
And he said, I think, congratulate Joseph.
You've got a lot of money now, by the way.
What, the telegraph?
The Galleys.
Yeah.
I saw him go for a thousand bucks for the book for you.
What he said was, I think it's a masterpiece, and Irwin Shaw and Joseph Heller agree, and then Irwin Shaw sent his own letter.
I love that line, Nazarian Lives, John Chancellor.
He, to me, is a class guy, too.
Oh, sure.
That helped everything else.
He was there, and he gave me my first television interview.
I think it was in August or September, a year after publication.
And the facts in the Fefter Catch-22 are pretty much true.
He had been their Kremlin reporter.
They brought him back, and they needed somebody to head the Today Show, which he didn't want to do.
He was a newsman.
And what he said was he would do, but he didn't want to make jokes about monkeys or clowns or freaks.
He himself would take it.
He himself could interview only the people he wanted to.
But then he shows you Yosarian limbs, the sticker.
Oh, yeah.
And that was in that bar down the street.
We were so drunk by 11 o'clock to 12 o'clock.
Those are the days.
You can't do it anymore.
I don't drink in the afternoons anymore.
It killed the day.
Back then, I didn't mind if it killed the day.
When I was working at Time Magazine, nobody worked in the afternoons anyway.
They were all drunk.
You mentioned Erwin Schock.
I remember he was interviewed years ago on, I forget whose show it was, you know, what's a good day, what's a bad day.
So you get up and you start to drop.
And then you go out and you might have a drink and you come back and say, the hell of it.
Do you, when you're writing, do you put quotas on yourself?
I mean, do you have...
I want to do three handwritten pages a day.
And my day is dedicated to a morning session.
Now, for me, morning is not what it is for real working man.
Probably I start working between 10 and 10.30 after breakfast.
And by 11.30 or 12.01, I usually have my three handwritten pages, which is the equivalent of one handwritten page with the pairs I used.
And since I moved out in East Hampton and had fewer diversions,
I generally will do four or five pendant pages in the morning.
Once that's done, I feel okay.
I've done my day's work.
Usually, if nothing distracts me in the afternoon or the evening, I will go back and do more, usually beginning by rewriting the last page I've done, even if I don't intend to change it.
It's like just getting into the neurotic pattern of writing.
I think I would always write on a typewriter.
I have the impression that most fictional artists they write in the long end.
But that's my quote.
And that's what he said.
He bangs out on the typewriter, I guess.
And you said you had this whole thing in shape before you actually started writing it.
You had that climactic scene, that scene at the end, not that scene, but that long sequence at the end.
You had that all... No, I didn't have the details of that.
That is pretty extraordinary.
Oh, yeah.
I'm so proud of that because I wonder... Well, I wonder if the story's about 16 or 17 characters.
If I had not dealt with them, then it really would feel that the book was incomplete, or would have good reason to complain.
What happened to...
What happened to this person?
What happened to the chapel?
I should have said so beautifully.
But you hit these things.
I mean, do you laugh?
I don't have to laugh.
I know it's funny, but I'm laughing.
When I laugh at my work is when I read a section that I haven't looked at for a few months, or when I read, we read Catch 22, and some of it just pops right out with complete surprise.
I'd forgotten what was there, and then I would laugh.
Oh, very much, yes.
So it's a pretty good, you were a slow writer.
Yeah.
What is it now?
Six or seven novels?
I forget.
I think it's five now.
Maybe six.
But I look at it this way.
It's like trying to understand the world of subatomic physics or astrological physics.
Between 1982 and 1984, I've written and published, God knows,
No working matter, picture this, and closing time.
It's five works.
Again, it's in 12 years, so I can't be that small.
But I was halfway through, a third-way through, God knows, but it's still a lot.
But you're actually, you're getting faster this year.
No, I'm not fast.
You see, picture this was quite normally between three and four years, as good as gold was between three and four years.
God knows what it would have been if I hadn't lost a year with the illness.
This is between five and six years.
So I don't think I'm getting pissed.
I think what I am doing is I tend to work every day now.
I wouldn't do it if I lived in New York because there'd be too many distractions.
welcome distractions.
I would make them.
Sure.
If people wouldn't call me up to say, let's go have a coffee now, a drink, I would call them up.
And in this mix, of course, you mentioned No Laughing Matter.
That's a work of non-fiction.
Yes.
And that was something you wrote with a friend.
Yes, Reed Vogel.
How was that as a challenge for you?
I mean, you said in that 74 interview that you could never be a journalist.
Yeah.
Well, I can write non-fiction only if it's...
personally, a personal reminiscence.
I've done a few articles far back.
The only ones that I could do, there's no journalistic articles, no truly informative articles.
They all deal with something personal, and they tend to be humorous.
A couple in the past that are very funny, not my movie writing experiences, but they're very far back.
I wouldn't even undertake to write a straightforward account or something.
Now, what made No Rapping Matter easier for me was the pattern of he and I doing all of the chapters and making comments about each other, so I was able to describe the experience of being almost totally paralyzed and recovered.
What an experience that is.
It's awful.
It's an awful disease.
I've never heard of it before.
I hadn't either, but that's what helped save me.
I mean, I didn't think I was going to be paralyzed.
I mean, on the first examination, it was on a Sunday in the doctor's office.
The doctor was a friend, and he called a neurologist, and they came over, and I said, you're going to get a little back.
And I said, okay.
I would not let it register that he was saying I was going to lose things.
He gave me various muscle tests, he saw them, and so I was losing strength.
I am more troubled by that disease now than I was when I was having it.
Just the other day, I got a letter from a man in California who said that a friend of his is Toby Powell.
I just got it.
But I go visit him when I got to San Francisco.
He said that the drive would be three hours.
And I said, I won't have three hours.
Knowing my schedule, if you were in San Francisco, I definitely would, but I would drive him a letter.
And I wrote a letter.
And in writing a letter about that disease now, it was more terrifying.
But why is it more troubling to you?
What?
Why is it more troubling to you?
Because I know the disease now.
And when I had it, I didn't understand it.
I didn't understand that I could be permanently paralyzed.
Almost all my muscles are weak now.
You'll say you didn't notice it, but if we talk long enough, it's only walking up steps, or if we were eating.
muscles and my chewing and swelling are very weak.
I can't clear food off my tongue to answer if you ask me a question.
I'd have to spit food at you.
So it's not a 100% recovery for me?
No, not for me.
The man in the book that Sam Singh was going to see at the end is a man who actually is alive and lives in Sydney.
His name is Ed Boyle.
He got the disease at 28 years old.
At the time, it has been a wonderful company, so they kept them on.
They may have had a specific operation, international operation, but he's retired now.
He also always must have been hit now.
You know, when I had the disease, I had not met him.
I had not, even though we had them in the same company, I met him for friends.
Friends I'd worked at the time, said, you know, Ed Bonin and George.
But it is interesting where, as Gilbert again points this out in her piece, that disease is a concern that has repeated itself throughout your work, but you then should experience such a frightful disease yourself.
Oh, it's a frightful disease, but it tells me of my friends.
I've been very, very lucky in that health.
But it is a concern in your work, though.
What disease is, yes, yes.
And at this age, the surprising thing is I worry less about it now than I did before I had the disease.
Now, I don't know whether disease is responsible for it or whether it's a resignation, a realization that by age people are going to get sick.
And so later I will do it.
Now, it's less frightening to me now, the idea of disease.
Mutilation, surgery is still kind of frightening the idea.
What's that again?
The idea of mutilation.
Surgery.
I remember doing an interview with Will Bezal years ago after he had said a novel in ancient Greece or whatever it was.
And I said, I almost get the feeling you'd like to live then.
No, I'd never want to live at a time when there was no anesthetic.
And, you know, think about it, I guess.
But no, I'll just assume I live now and the medicine is better.
I won't take up too much of your time.
I know they said an hour, but I think we really should talk about the central concern.
There are so many concerns in the novel and themes, and I'm not going to have to be addressing the novel explaining them quite well.
But you really did want to do something about a summing up about
the awareness of Papa Diem, I guess, time passing.
That's not Papa Diem.
Papa Diem would make the most sense of all of the day, but it's a safe thing, isn't it?
That's not in those times.
The fact that time is passing and things are coming to an end is.
Nobody uses that as a justification for
for doing something they would not do.
There's a remarkable interview of Steven Potter on television.
I don't know if he's through or not.
He knew he was going to be dead in nine days or weeks from cancer.
And he's very articulate.
And one thing, he said, well, you have a very nice to do things without something inconsistency.
And one of the things I think I'd like to do is shoot a little bit of money.
Shoot a little bit of money.
That is funny, isn't it?
And mainly what he thinks of is the corruption of values through journalism.
But yes, I see closing times as a setting up.
There's a line that this Mr. Pitcher quotes in there, which is the end of a kind of, quoting from the book says, the gods were growing tired again and it was time for another shakeup.
I don't think the world's going to come to an end.
I think the world I know and you know in America already has come to an end.
And I think we're really in a time of political shambles, an economic shambles, an ethical anarchy.
We don't know it yet, and I think something has to emerge.
It may be better or worse, but usually it is a catastrophe if you see a change in this country.
You talk about an ethical shakeup.
Ethical anarchy.
When you look at this O.J.
Simpson thing, and the preoccupation with that, that's one of the things I think.
The serious issue for that is this.
It illustrates the concept of trial by jury.
It's okay.
And that a person could be presumed innocent or found guilty.
No longer works.
Those were principles that were valid at a time when the criminal population was very small.
And the big fear, the biggest fear, was of government purity.
Now, that's not our biggest fear.
I mean, I see this defense team.
And their mandate is not to give this guy the best defense.
Their mandate is to get him off.
If you were to ask me as a young guy, I would say, if it was up to me, I think all of DePaul's brothers should be in jail on the charge of this pre-obstruction of justice.
Do you mind if I use that quote?
Well, not to say, I would say this, but it would not be rivalrous.
I did do an interview with Donald Westlake a couple of weeks ago.
It was funny that he'd write these.
Yeah, yeah.
And he said, I said, what do you think about this?
He said, well, if I were writing, he said, I would have looked both gloves in the same place.
If I were writing it, I would have said, but, see, lawyers, like most professionals, they'll take fashion, they can, and that's, it's their own interest.
What's good for them is what's right, and they would argue, say, well, our obligation is to make the state prove the charges, even if we know he's guilty.
Just to jump a bit here.
But what I meant was exactly that.
It's corruption of justice, corruption of trial by jury, and that's just one cause was happening.
And the nation accepted.
There are two things, and then I'll, I promise I'll leave.
In the preface of a Catch-22, you say, Yosarian may die, but he will not die by my end.
Yeah, not by my end.
And that is interesting, because I guess people have wondered what happened to Yosarian.
Well, Yosarian will live.
And just talk about maybe you didn't address yourself to that there.
Well, at the end of Catch-22, he's alive.
He's in trouble.
Or as a former peasant would say, deep doo-doo, because he didn't say shit.
But he is a liar.
And repeating the pattern, in closing time, you're saying he's a liar, and making the same decision, or an analysis decision, as he made in cash money.
Giving up a security of a kind that he does not relish, and taking a risk by going up outside where there might be a war raging,
And I don't give the answer to that.
Just as I'm happy for me, too, when people would ask me what happened to Yosara, I'd say, I have no idea.
I left that open.
And at the end of closing time, what happens to Yosara?
And it's still open.
The joke I like to make is, that's sort of 25 years from now, if I don't have an idea for a book, I'll write another thing open.
And I imagine, you spoke about saying, if somebody else tried to
as they do with Margaret Mitchell, the characters.
To assume for you what... Well, I'd be dead by then.
They're not allowed to be, but that's the permission of Michael Hayes instead of them.
What do you think of something like that in general, tampering with the... I pay no attention to it.
I mean, the book is not going to be... Well, I mean, it's not going to be good.
It's obviously making it like a better trip.
And, you know, that thing was just the kind of thing I wanted very much to avoid.
I think it would be shameful for me to have done a sequel that would be just pure in the pan.
You know, something flimsy and quick.
And then one other, and our promise always is old.
I guess this is the question I was going to ask earlier when we talked about seven, six, seven books.
Do you view your work as a corpus at all?
Yeah.
I'm very much aware that all my novels have certain things together.
And in this novel, there's one or two lines that appear from almost all my other books.
It's not conscious.
Originally, there were allusions to gold.
I still think there's one or two that come from Billy's gold.
There are a few choices that come from No Lear Can Matter.
The nurse in Closing Time is The Nurse of No Lear Can Matter, and it's the nurse in my life.
We're married now for six or seven years.
There's catchphrase, there's not much of something happening in this.
Maybe it's your mind.
The sensibility is my own in all of these books.
And consequently, it tends to be a similarity.
It's an ironic view of society, and yet one is based on almost a simplistic sense of morality, which I have.
And we get through these characters who are not Marvel, uh, uh, uh, what, uh, I handled, uh, not villainous, but not villainous.
There's a narrowing of Joseph Heller.
There's almost nobody in this book that she's offered as somebody obnoxious, or not even Milo, and not the man in the White House, whoever it may be.
I've called a little prick.
I was going to say, he may be a little prick.
Well, I don't think you can use that.
But in this novel, almost nobody is that, they're apprehensive, but almost nobody is what?
Villainous.
And the women.
It's the first time in the work of mine.
I've dealt with now as a series, as I will say.
And the wives are wonderful.
I don't say that both.
I say that because I've been told.
my interviewers and my friends who read, is it a woman or a woman?
Is it a conscious knowing of Josephine or a natural woman?
No, I think it has to do with the nature of this book.
The tendency of Americans, American novels, it goes back a long way.
At least, at least, anyway, is to treat women as being injurious to men's potential menaces to their integrity and their artistic aspirations.
I think, I don't think it's peculiarly American, but you'd certainly find it.
Marilyn Churn, Marilyn Stemmingway, and John O'Hara, it's almost not the sympathetic women.
It's almost a happy marriage.
Happy marriage is usually not the substance of my own.
I have two happy marriages here.
And I'm very pleased that I was able to bring it all so successfully.
One general question to wrap it up.
As you can tell, I'm very proud of this book.
It's very much based on this review, and I've been told that there's a very good review coming out of the Chicago Tribune by John Aldridge.
And the other day, a girlfriend of my wife called up.
She's subscribed to Elle magazine.
And she read Iron Graft.
That's a woman.
Yeah.
Well, it validates the point you just made a minute ago about women.
Well, what was I?
She refers to me, my comic imagination is a national treasure.
So you're catching me a ton of the hard work.
I was aware of that on the way down today.
I think this is going to be good.
Everybody's going to drop them tomorrow at an interview, so I'm kind of glad I'm
So it's a body of work that you're happy with.
This is going to sound immodest, and it's more in England and more in Germany and more in Scandinavia than here.
My five and six novels, if you count them, have a very high esteem than I am.
In this country, we have too many very good novels.
People pay attention to any one of them.
But this is a value of work, and I am very proud of it.
Where are your papers going?
What's that?
Your papers?
Is there an institution?
Oh, no, I have a bash.
Brandeis got the papers from the past 22, and maybe something happened.
But they've not contacted me about the others.
I got them all together.
Well, they can't.
Way back, I tried to buy them back from Bandai Street, because they didn't give it to you, but there's nothing to mention.
There's nobody to talk to them.
They really don't seem to have a special collections of art in there, like Texas would be perfect.
Texas, the New York Public Library, and BU.
This book would be particularly interesting, because the first printed draft,
was 1,100 pages.
The second was 900, before I began editing.
Then when I met with the editor, it was 1,700 pages.
You mean the first set of galleys?
No, no, no.
My manuscript, the first part that I completed, as a printed manuscript, was 1,100 pages.
And I knew even before I got there, that's quite huge.
I didn't want to be that long, and it was over there.
And then on my own, I went through it again.
It was two on the page short, and it was two on the page short.
And then you got it very great where you went.
Yeah.
But I think those manuscripts might be interesting.
And I think there were three or four whole chapters to read it.
And eventually they'll be published in Playboy, because Playboy did two chapters like this.
That's what I think.
I'm going to wrap it up in a second.